---
tags:
  - chm2045
---

# 10.4 Gas Mixtures and Partial Pressures – Dalton’s Law


• If two gases that don’t react are combined in a container, they act as if they are alone in the container.  
• Dalton’s Law of Partial Pressures: the total pressure $𝑃_{total}$ of a mixture of gases equals the sum of the pressures that each gas $P_{i}$ would exert if it were present alone

Expression for Dalton’s law of partial pressures

$$ P_{total} = P_1 + P_2+ P_{3}+ ...$$

- Therefore, Total pressure exerted by a mixture of gases is the sum of the pressures of the individual gases  
• Identities of the gas particles do not matter

If $P_{t} = n_{1}\frac{RT}{V} + n_{2}\frac{RT}{V} + n_{3}\frac{RT}{V}$ then $$P_{t}=n_{t}\frac{RT}{V}$$
## Mole Fractions and Partial Pressure  
• The ratio of the number of moles of a particular component i in the mixture to the total number of moles in the mixture.  
• Define mole fraction, $\chi$ 

$$\chi_{1} = \frac{\text{moles of compound 1}}{\text{total moles}} = \frac{n_1}{n_{t}}$$
$\chi_{1} = \frac{n_i}{n_{total}}$

The partial pressure that a gas in a mixture exerts is proportional to its mole fraction:
$$$$
$$P_i = \chi_{i}P_{total}$$


## Collecting Gaseous Products

Water displacement can be used to  collect and measure the volume of  any gas that does not dissolve in  water:  
 $$P_{total} = P_{atm} = P_{O_2} + P_{H_{2}O}$$

# 10.5 Kinetic-Molecular Theory of Gases

The behavior of gases can be described using kinetic molecular theory (KMT), which is based upon four assumptions:  
1) Gases consist of large numbers of molecules that are in continuous, random motion.  
2) The combined volume of all the molecules of the gas is negligible relative to the total volume in which the gas is contained.  
3) Attractive and repulsive forces between gas molecules are negligible.  
4) Energy can be transferred between molecules during collisions, but the average kinetic energy of the molecules does not change with time, as long as the temperature of the gas remains constant.  
5) The average kinetic energy of the molecules is proportional to the absolute temperature.

## Gas Laws Explained—Boyle’s Law

Boyle’s law states that the volume of a gas is inversely proportional to the pressure.  
- Decreasing the volume forces the molecules into a smaller space.  
-  An increase in volume at constant temperature causes the pressure to decrease.  

Explanation to Boyle’s Law  
– Average kinetic energy is unchanged.  
– Increase in volume: Molecules move a longer distance between collisions.  
– Fewer wall collisions per unit time